# Project: Data Warehouse
----

## Project Description
---

el objetivo de este proyecto es construir y diseñar procesos de ETL pipelines para A music streaming startup, Sparkify que ejecuten la migracion de su base de datos a la nube. los pipelines cumplen los siguientes pasos: extracts their data from S3 and stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights
Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app. 

### Data Sources
#### Song Dataset
The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are file paths to two files in this dataset.

`song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json`
`song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json`

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.
```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

#### Log Dataset
The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are file paths to two files in this dataset.

`log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json`
`log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json`

### Analysis Schema: OLAP cube

#### Fact Table

* **songplays** -  records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
  * songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent
  
#### Dimension Tables

* **users** - users in the app
  * user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
* **songs** - songs in music database
  * song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
* **artists** - artists in music database
  * artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
* **time** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
  * start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday
  

## Installation
---

Clone the repository
```
  git clone https://github.com/mgranica/data_engineer_nanodegree.git
```

## Usage
---

### 1. Cluster setup
> the `dwh_cluster` folder contains the files needed to create a redshift cluster to host the data warehouse and its respective ETL pipelines.

* At first, the cluster configuration parameters must be filled in the `dwh.cfg` file. In it the cluster characteristics, the IAM role, the paths of the S3 involved and the AWS credentials are indicated.
```
    [CLUSTER]
    DB_NAME=
    DB_USER=
    DB_PASSWORD=
    DB_PORT=
    DB_CLUSTER_TYPE=
    DB_NUM_NODES=
    DB_NODE_TYPE=
    DB_CLUSTER_IDENTIFIER=
    DB_IAM_ROLE_NAME=
    REGION_NAME=us-west-2

    [IAM_ROLE]
    ARN=

    [S3]
    LOG_DATA=
    LOG_JSONPATH=
    SONG_DATA=

    [AWS]
    KEY=
    SECRET=
```
* with the configuration parameters set, we are able to create the cluster by executing from the rootpath project:
```
    python dwh_cluster/create_cluster.py
```
* in case of any configuration error, you can create the cluster by filling in and following the steps inside the associated notebook `Creating_Redshift_Cluster_AWS_IaC.ipnb`.

### 2. Create tables
> create your fact and dimension tables for the star schema in Redshift.

```
    python create_tables.py
```

### 3. ETL process
> load data from S3 into staging tables on Redshift and then process that data into your analytics tables on Redshift.
```
    python etl.py
```

### 4. Clean Cluster Resources
> Once the data warehouse has been uploaded, we can proceed to elomiate the cluster resources.
```
    python dwh_cluster/clean_resources.py
```

## Data Warehouse
>`sql_queries.py`define the SQL statements, which will be imported into `etl.py` and `create_tables.py`



